Paul Kagame (born October 23, 1957, Tambwe, Ruanda-Urundi [now in Rwanda]) is a former Rwandan military leader who is now a politician. 
He led the Rwandan Patriot Front (RPF) to defeat Hutu extremist
forces and ended the 1994 Rwandan genocide. In 2000 he became president of Rwanda.

Early life
Kagame grew up in exile in Uganda, where his parents had taken him as a young child when Hutu violence toward the Tutsi 
flared in 1959 during the buildup to Rwandan independence from Belgium. In Uganda, he studied at Makerere University in Kampala, 
before joining the forces of Yoweri Museveni, who overthrew Uganda’s military government in 1986. Kagame became Museveni’s chief of intelligence and 
gained a reputation for incorruptibility 
and severity by enforcing a stringent code of behavior.

Many Ugandans resented the Rwandan presence in their country, however,
and, as the 1980s closed, Kagame and three other expatriate Rwandan military leaders formed the Tutsi-led RPF and plotted an invasion of their homeland. 
In 1990, while Kagame was studying at the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 
that invasion—mostly involving Tutsi veterans of the Ugandan army—was undertaken and repulsed. 
In the process the other three members of the RPF command were killed. Kagame assumed direction of the civil war, 
which was suspended in August 1993 by a peace agreement that promised—but never delivered—real power sharing.

Early in April 1994 Rwandan Pres. Juvénal Habyarimana, a Hutu, 
was killed when his plane was shot down over Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. 
This sparked a campaign of genocide against the Tutsi and their moderate Hutu allies. 
(See Rwanda genocide of 1994.) In response, Kagame led a force of 10,000–14,000 RPF s
oldiers against the Hutu forces perpetrating the genocide. By eschewing direct assaults 
and utilizing protracted artillery attacks on enemy strongholds, Kagame’s forces were able 
to minimize casualties and retake Kigali in early July. By that time, however, more than 800,000 
people had been killed in the genocide. The RPF set up a new government that had for its president a Hutu, 
Pasteur Bizimungu, but the real power appeared to rest with Kagame, who, at the age of 37, assumed the titles of vice president and minister of defense. 
In 2000 he was elected president of Rwanda’s transitional government by the National Assembly.

After the genocide, many Hutu forces had fled to neighboring Zaire (after May 1997, the Democratic Republic of the Congo [DRC]) 
and used the country as a base from which to attack Rwanda. Frustrated that Zaire’s government was not taking enough action to stop the attacks, 
Kagame sent Rwandan troops into the country in late 1996 to battle the Hutu forces. While there, the troops also intervened in the rebellion taking place,
supporting Laurent Kabila in his successful quest to depose Zairean president Mobutu Sese Seko. In 1998, after Kabila had been in power for a little more than a year, 
Kagame shifted support to rebels who sought to oust Kabila. Kagame was one of several African leaders operating military forces in the DRC during that country’s
civil war—dubbed Africa’s “first world war” 
 for this reason—and he was the subject of much international criticism for Rwanda’s involvement. He supported rebel forces until 2002, 
 when he signed a peace accord and 
 agreed to remove Rwandan troops in exchange for the disarmament and repatriation of Hutu forces in the DRC.
Presidency
During the 2003 presidential campaign, Kagame portrayed himself as a Rwandan rather than a Tutsi and attempted to downplay the existence of ethnic strife in the country.
 Kagame—who engaged in aggressive campaign tactics against his Hutu rivals, going so far as to arrest opponents’ supporters and forcing 
 some candidates to withdraw from the race—won a landslide victory in the country’s first multiparty elections. He was sworn into office on September 12, 
ending the nine-year transitional government. A major focus of his presidency was building national unity and the country’s economy.
In 2010 Kagame sought reelection. In the run-up to the August presidential election, some opposition media outlets were repressed, and several individuals,
 including an independent journalist and an opposition party leader, were murdered—although Kagame vowed that neither he nor his regime were involved in the killings.
  Because of this environment, several opposition parties were unable to field candidates; some candidates faced arrest,
 others fled, and some were excluded from participation. The three candidates who eventually stood against Kagame posed little challenge.
  Official results indicated that Kagame had been reelected with 93 percent of the vote, and voter turnout was reported as more than 95 percent.

Kagame continued to work toward rebuilding the country and was lauded for making notable gains, such as fostering a consistently
strong economy and having improved social conditions in Rwanda. However, praise for the progress occurring under his administration
continued to be tempered by criticism of its intolerance of political dissent and media freedom, as well as Rwanda’s alleged continued
involvement in conflicts in neighboring countries. Still, he remained popular in many circles at home and abroad

